this idea that somehow we can program
the world to be
the way we want it to be
it doesn't work that way that's really
interesting you know and i think that's
one of the reasons why we have these
epidemics of mental health issues the
younger generation that has grown up
with you know cell phones and sort of
ability to program i want to watch this
program now i want to listen to this
song and oh on top of everything else
it's free
we think
that we can make the world the way we
want it to be but when it isn't
it's creating all sorts of very real
human suffering
susan leato welcome to the show thank
you so much for having me i'm really
delighted to be here i'm really excited
to get into this so this is a topic i
actually haven't thought a lot about and
so getting a chance to read your book
and i forced myself so we're going to be
talking about ethics but in the context
of
how to
live life well and make good decisions
and that really feels like the right
framework for what you do and i think
the word ethics is going to lead some
people astray as like oh this is finger
wagging and judgy judgy but you really
go out of your way to say that's not
what this is and that shame and blame
and all of that actually create ethical
problems they don't solve them so that
was a really keen insight so we're going
to be talking about how to live life
well how to think well about your
decision making
but to do that i think we have to get
into the framework of like how to do
that and so i forced myself to write
down because i never think of the word
ethics but if you said are you an
ethical person i would get like oh my
god of course like that's really
important to me but i had never like
stopped to write down what the
things are beyond what i'll call my
belief system i hadn't stopped to write
down sort of my ethical framework
and your book really begs that question
as you go through
so i want to start there what is the
framework by which you
[Music]
come to an ethical endpoint or a north
star a way to like know if your decision
is adhering to
the right set of things
so it's a great question um and it's
actually a question that i address in my
first book the power of ethics but i
have a framework that applies to any
ethical question you could come up with
whether it's family or whether it's like
i have in the book should you use
spotify for free or whether it's big
political questions
and the framework is four words and the
first word is principles and as you're
saying we all have our sort of set of
values or principles they might be
things like respect or integrity or
accountability or compassion or
generosity and i certainly don't dictate
anybody else's principles um and in fact
i work with people and i work with
students to sort of think about what are
the four or five or six or seven
probably not 10 and probably not one
principles that are most important to
you and sort of your lens through which
you're going to look at anything that
comes your way um the second is we have
to think about the information we have
before us
and is that the second word that's the
second word information
and the information um sometimes it's
complete sometimes we know that you know
our grandmother is a certain age
and
there are car keys in front of her and
she wants to use them
and we know that she probably doesn't
have great eyesight
and other times we don't have the
information that we need and an example
of that would be something like gene
editing you know we think this can be a
fantastic opportunity
cure cancer in adults but wow misused
you know how many potential damaging
side effects could there be what if it's
misused like it was by a rogue chinese
scientist to edit the genes of of twin
girls embryos
um so information is the second
the second item and really what we're
talking about with information is do you
have the information you need to make
the decision
and if you don't i just say be mindful
of the gap just as you're making a
decision just be mindful of the
information that you're missing kind of
monitor it over time and see if things
change see if you can fill that
information in
before you make a decision or not
necessarily because sometimes we just
have to make decisions sometimes we just
have to decide you know are we going to
spacex are they going to send that
rocket ship up in space they don't have
all the information they need you know
how do they decide that it's ready um
and sometimes the car keys are right in
front of us and the grandmother is right
in front of us and we're going to have
to decide
let her drive or don't
right then and there so
we don't always have the luxury of
having all the information we wish we
had and also
i mean i'm not someone who thinks that
anyone myself included will spend all
day be laboring the ethics of every
decision that i make so
depending on the importance of the
decision if it's a big health decision
uh or a decision like using 23andme
where we might learn some really
challenging things
then we're probably going to take some
more time gather some more information
if it's a decision like am i going to
press i agree on the netflix terms of
service
my finger is on the button before i even
can say the word information
so we have principles and information
and the third is stakeholders um and
basically by that i mean anybody or
anything affected by your decision
and the critical thing in today's world
is that we affect so many more people
than we might imagine
with our decisions and in part that's
due to technology we post something we
don't know where it's going to end up
for the good or for the ill
but also we just have all this
opportunity to reach more people which
you're you know you're obviously an
expert in but we need to be mindful of
of how many different people
can be affected by the decisions we make
and then finally consequences and the
way i look at this is we need to think
about the consequences of our decisions
now and in the future sort of short
medium and long term
and very often particularly in the
business world um but also in daily life
we see people making a decision sort of
looking out two or three weeks or a
quarter
and then they get to the end and they
look out to the next quarter and they
think that they're being sort of
long-term thinkers but in fact we're
being serial short-term thinkers if that
makes sense we sort of set up little
periods little chunks of time for
ourselves so the message with
consequences is really
think of multiple time frames don't just
think of today or tomorrow
but also
again in the interest of efficiency
i always ask what are the consequences
that are important
and irreparable
so if something's going to happen where
somebody's life is going to be lost you
may be willing to compromise on a lot of
other principles because that's the one
thing that you can't let happen
you know an example of that would be i
had a question from an ngo once about
should we pay bribes
to get vaccines into a country
um right it's an interesting question
yeah because they're the one and this
particular ngo is the only source of
life-saving vaccines for children
and you know nobody thinks bribery is
ethical
but
you know this was the only way these
children were going to get vaccinated
and a lot of people were getting very
sort of if i may say so high and mighty
about the ethics of bribery and finally
i looked at them and i said
all right let's step back
and i always suggest looking at our
decisions from the standpoint of the
person who will be most adversely
affected
and then imagining that person is us
so i said if it were your child would
you care about the bribery
and then all of a sudden
the bribery was an issue we had to deal
with
we had to make sure it didn't become a
habit
etc etc but you know yeah that's so
interesting so what i love about that
and that's really where i want to get to
at least in the beginning of the
conversation is
you need something that cuts through the
clutter the noise the debate the back
and forth to okay cool this adheres to
this principle and now i'm going to move
forward so we've got principles
information stakeholders consequences
and as we look at those it it
there there's really not a lot of like
ultra black and white and you talk a lot
about edge cases you talk a lot about
getting away from binary thinking which
can be really problematic
and
but
that creates this like where it becomes
hard to navigate your way through
something so for instance going back to
principles
do we dictate to people what the
principles should be
or is it we just know that principles
are going to be determined by different
people
so i think everybody should be able to
determine their own principles
but if we're assessing somebody else's
decision if we're looking at sort of a
scandal in the news for example
we can look at what principles
the company for example or the
government official
claimed to be living by
and see well what happened here was it
that they actually were not living by
their stated principles and the
principles were pretty good
or was it actually the principles were
not so good so i'll give you an example
of each
one example of a company that had really
credible principles including safety was
boeing
and yet after two
tragic crashes in indonesia and ethiopia
the boeing ceo was still begging
then president trump to keep planes
flying
so the company's stated principles were
excellent but they just were not living
by them uh at that moment and in all the
moments that led up to
what drove those crashes
conversely
we look at a company like uber back when
they were having their big moment of
sexual misconduct and changed ceos and
the like
and the principles were things like
making magic
so
a little vague a little vague a little
hard to hold yourself accountable for
making magic or toe stomping
what did toe stomping mean i'm not
exactly sure i i'm not sure if it meant
just like step on all the toes you need
to to get where you want to go
i don't know that's my gut instinct
because even here at impact theory we
talk a lot about no one has toes so
don't worry about stepping on people's
toes now i would never say toe stomp
because that has like a connotation of
aggressively trying to mess somebody
else up
so cool i get that
um so
this is where it starts to get
interesting to me and i think to ground
this for people so basically what i want
to do is walk through how do we actually
generate a north star so that people can
think well through these things because
i'm not even thinking necessarily
societally i tend to think about the
individual and what they can do to make
their life better so i want to help
discover the process by which you would
identify
principles that are going to serve
people well that are going to take them
in a good direction to get there i think
there's at least one thing we need to do
but this might be like really nested and
somewhat complex and i'll say is the
north star so what is that thing that we
should be aiming at i'll give you my
example
of what a north star is then i would
love to hear like if you already have
one
if you do great and then i want to find
out what is the most
persnickety
question that you've had to deal with
where
it was maybe even surprisingly
controversial so that we can get into
the thick of one where it isn't obvious
okay so my north star would be that
everybody at the individual level should
be doing everything they can to reduce
human suffering
um and i'll even say and uh promote
fulfillment so that would be the thing
i'm always thinking about that's sort of
the bedrock by which i i judge my own
decisions
and
if i'm honest judge the decisions of
other people
so that would be my
one thing it's very layered and of
course there's more to take into
consideration you said it's probably not
one principle that it's maybe not 10 but
it's not one but if i were going to give
a north star what am i steering towards
it's the
lowering the amount of human suffering
in the world through my own actions and
then increasing the odds that somebody
will be able to achieve fulfillment
what is up my friend you and i are
living in a golden era of
self-improvement we have books platforms
like youtube courses seminars virtual
events workshops the list really is
endless the internet has been so good
for people like you and me who want to
accomplish greater and greater things in
life and now my friend it is about to
get even better i've been spending most
of this year working on the single most
entertaining tool that you're ever going
to have around self-improvement and it
is called project kaizen it's a web 3
based game experience that will be
unlike anything else you've ever engaged
with in your life partly because the
technology is new and it's amazing if
you're not familiar with blockchain nfts
and all of that kaizen is going to be
the perfect introduction for you as it
is an excellent intersection of
entertainment and learning all backed by
the blockchain we're getting closer and
closer to launching this project for you
every single day we are working our
faces to the bone to get this thing out
there and my friend i want you to
experience it so click the link on your
screen and head on over to my discord
channel to stay up to date and be one of
the first to join me inside of project
kaizen which by the way gets its name
from the japanese term of never ending
improvement all right back to today's
episode so i love that um and mine is
actually quite similar so
what i phrase is slightly differently
what i say is that ethical decision
making tethers us to our humanity
so we have this massive opportunity if
we think about even one or two of the
four words that i gave you
or even just stop and think about what
our north star is just the simple fact
of pausing and taking a breath and
thinking about the impact of our
decisions thinking about the
consequences is already really huge but
i think that ethical decision making
tethers us to our humanity um and that
means different things in different
circumstances i was going to say like it
can mean a moment of it can mean
reducing suffering it can mean a moment
of kindness
it can mean prioritizing human health
and well-being above above other things
um but it's all about our humanity it's
and i think ethics is really the great
connector so by putting human beings and
human well-being first that's another
way of saying getting rid of suffering
um i think we i think we have huge
opportunity to be able to do that that
is untapped
agreed okay so if we have roughly the
same north star
now what is um what's the most just
difficult
ethical question you've ever come
against
oh my goodness there are so many so
um i
let me just say you mentioned banishing
sort of binary thinking uh i do think
there are certain circumstances um where
binary thinking is important to maintain
and there are not very many of them but
they are things like racism
sexual misconduct inciting violence
um many kinds of phobias um
against certain uh certain groups so i
do think that for me that's binary
that's something we all need to work to
try to eradicate um
but i think uh one question that's come
up a lot in different ways including
with the elon musk's purchase of twitter
but also all over university campuses
is pitting free speech
against
how we treat each other
and that's one aspect of human suffering
there's a lot of suffering from the way
we treat each other there's a lot of
suffering from
speech that is free
but racist or dangerous
now there are
limitations on free speech in different
environments where i'm seeing a lot of
it is in academic institutions but it's
in daily life
and it's on twitter
and it's this battle of you know who
gets to decide where the boundaries are
between my right to free speech and
indeed the value of free speech in terms
of creating a diverse society in terms
of furthering democratic uh society in
terms of our own right to express
ourselves
versus kind of harm that can be done
with speech so that's it's just a really
really difficult problem and because
it's on social media i think it affects
all of us uh and it's at a scale that is
just in you know it's it's global it's
at a scale that's just unfathomable and
unprecedented okay so this is perfect
um before we dive into this i will say
that i don't consider myself to have any
particular wisdom around free speech so
i have no doubt that i will
um throw out ideas or questions that i
don't think any of us do it's an
intractable problem so as long as people
understand that i i'm certainly not in
this conversation in any way shape or
form trying to say that i have thought
through this or that i think i have the
answers only that what i hope to do in
this conversation is um
practice myself how to think through
incredibly hard problems and so whenever
somebody asks me a question
if i don't know the answer what i always
say is well let me walk you through how
i think about it and so
that way it's like hey i don't have like
there are some things um for instance i
feel very confident if you're asking me
about mindset or how to go from not
being an entrepreneur to being an
entrepreneur what do you have to learn
like all of those things i have a high
degree of confidence that i have answers
that are useful
meaning that they are efficacious that
if you have a goal if you take my advice
it will actually move you towards that
goal so uh but in free speech i don't
have that so i just haven't i don't know
if anybody who does i think we're all
kind of mucking around in complexity
here amazing so perfect for us to
explore so now we have our north star
what i want to get into is
what ends up making this
such a difficult conversation
and what do we put in place to navigate
this well so number one for me anyway is
going to be um
what what i was just talking about so
what's going to reduce human suffering
what's going to lift
people's ability to achieve fulfillment
at the individual level because that's
how i think and and i think that way
because i think it is the right
way that was air quotes for anybody just
listening uh the right way to do it uh
with full humility of recognizing to
your point in the book you say you know
a lot of times we think we know
something but do we really know yeah and
so being super thoughtful about that so
i air quote that to to express to self
reflect to my own self that i need to
stay humble there um but i think that's
the right way to approach things right
defined as it will move you towards your
goal and my goal being the north star so
we have like a nice there's at least
internal logic to what i'm presenting
um
so
i'm gonna add that second element though
to what i think people have to do as
they think through a hard problem is
if i were gonna give three things to it
so one i have that north star
two i'm super paranoid about whether or
not i'm right so i completely distrust
myself
uh and i think that's why so i have
enough confidence to move forward but
enough humility to know i've been wrong
so many times in my life that no matter
how right i feel that i need to be open
and seeking disconfirming evidence
and then the third thing that i would
use in finding sort of the
again right decision meaning that it
moves me towards my goal is data that is
showing me that i'm actually moving
towards my goal
and i feel like
that is something that is often missed
in these grander conversations and i
don't know if you'd agree with this but
i feel like certainly in america we're
getting more and more polarized and
pulling away from each other
and
trying to
find data so we can see is this actually
working or not like we have a stated
goal which should have a metric tied to
it are we actually getting closer to it
does that feel like the right setup to
attack the problem of free speech or am
i missing something so i agree with all
of that and i would just add so i
certainly agree that we have to approach
these problems with a hefty dose of
humility
i think one of the things that's really
complicated about the free speech
question is that we're sort of living
the free speech question by having
discussions about about it
um and i think we need to uh one other
thing i would add is that when we look
at a really complex problem like this to
your point about you know how do we
tackle complex problems we we should
look at the parts and try to pare it
down a little bit and the parts that for
me at least are not complicated
are
things like where where do we go binary
for sure where should you know where do
i think there could be broad agreement
instead of the two extremes you
described
um one is um inciting violence
somebody's saying you know everybody you
know go out and kill 10 people um
any kind of inciting violence should be
you know that that shouldn't be an issue
in terms of in terms of free speech
um where do you draw the line there so
this is so the whole idea of the overton
window
i don't know do you want to explain to
people what the overton window is go for
it okay so overtune window is what is
acceptable to talk about
so one of the ways that that the mob i
will say again i'm sort of air quoting
that but the now that social media makes
it possible for there to be a mob no
matter where you are if you're on the
platform
the way that the mob intentionally or
otherwise um
tries to influence free speech we'll say
because they can't stop it but they can
certainly influence it until we get into
like censorship by the platform so the
platforms can very much
uh put hard limits based on shadow
banning and things like that around the
overtone window but the overturn window
is the things that are acceptable to
talk about
um so
for here's a great example of something
that i'm super grateful is outside of
the overton window uh
hey um we should you know to our doctor
friend in china like hey there are
people that cause if i remember right
from the real story it was he was trying
to make the twins uh more resilient to
hiv exactly and so hey i'm gonna make
this real quick gene modification to hiv
and we're good right
and that
that falls into sort of eugenics
territory and has this like knock-on
effect of like unknown things now that
particular example isn't necessarily
eugenics but like it it to me is a
little too close to like
that where some things are okay and
other things just have to be eradicated
now i'm actually a huge proponent of
gene editing we can get into the
messiness of that later but like that
would be an example of where we're all
just like no like you can't gene edit
the germline just it's completely off
the table we're not going to discuss it
nope nope nope
um
so that would be an example of something
it's outside the pale of what we
consider um
okay child pornography is something
we've all agreed on you know
so yeah no i was just gonna say there
are there aren't many of those things
but we at least need to start with okay
where do we have agreement or or you
know at least by and large agreement
and things that are as you say beyond
the pale
but the point that you raise about the
instant mob is critical because it's why
we don't have a sense today of where to
draw the line and certainly after what
we saw on january 6th the insurrection i
mean we it's very hard because all of a
sudden you know one statement on social
media millions of people around the
planet
uh
can respond to it and indeed what did we
see with this tragic shooting in buffalo
the governor of new york said it was a
quote feeding frenzy i mean she talked
about and i talk about in a lot of my
work the contagion and basically you
know it changes
the question completely if you're
talking about somebody standing on a
soapbox in central park saying you know
let's light the theater on fire versus
somebody posting something on social
media and even the supreme court hasn't
quite figured out what to do with that
yet um but it does change the what is
sort of an immediate threat what is
clear and present danger um to use sort
of legal terminology what is you know
it's very different when you have um as
you say when you have social media make
you know creating an instant mob
yeah so okay so just to put all the
pieces on the table so we have the
overton window there's going to be some
things that you can talk about some
things that you can't
um figuring out where the edges of that
are going to be extremely difficult
and
as we build our framework to figure that
out
what like where do you fall on the
overton window like should everything be
discussable like even as i was giving
the example of the
um
the doctor editing the gene for hiv i
actually want them to be able to talk
about it i don't want them to be able to
do it so i sort of gave a terrible
example of the overton window which
would be something we shouldn't even
discuss
and so
so if we're removing
um
inciting violence
you've got elon musk saying i'm just
going to follow the law of the land so
the will of the people if people want
less free speech then they will vote for
it so in each jurisdiction it doesn't
look like the twitter sale is going to
go through but when it did look like it
was going to go through he was sort of
publicly pontificating about how he
would handle it
that was his solution
um
do we need a solution so given my
framework
the only thing i come back to is and
this is a piece that i haven't put on
the table yet is as i was mapping out
sort of how i go about things
um
i sort of clung to that the the concept
that i think the founding fathers of
this country is where it came from
check me if i'm incorrect about that but
the idea of my rights end where somebody
else's rights begin
and so that notion feels important to
put on the table so um if we're looking
at free speech through that lens so
inciting not being able to incite
violence
seems to be a response to the idea of my
rights and where yours begin so if i'm
doing something that triggers something
that's going to take away your rights
then i can't do that
but short of that being able to think
well through the problem it feels like
using my
definitions it feels like the overton
window should
not necessarily i i would say infinite
up to that point of again taking
somebody else's rights away um
but that isn't i don't think that's
universally agreed upon so it's a so all
of this is very tricky but if we look at
first of all um in terms of defining the
problem or tackling the problem what are
the big pieces of this problem one big
piece of the problem is that
corporations have outsized
influence on how speech is distributed
and so that's it's twitter it's facebook
and beyond uh and that's something that
we didn't we've never had before so
that's a huge issue
and the second is that technology makes
things virulently contagious so it's not
one racist remark in somebody's living
room not that that's acceptable at least
to me but it's something that will
instantaneously um you know get fired
around the world and potentially you
know tweeted and retweeted or liked or
however however that's happening so the
danger level
on both on on
on various um angles on what violence is
on what racism is is as you've said is a
whole other level so that's another
piece of the problem we have to solve
then we have to solve the problem of who
gets to decide where we're drawing the
lines who gets to decide about the
overturned window who gets to decide um
you know other than again in the very
clear areas like child pornography
who gets to decide um and a lot of it is
coming back to these companies are
deciding
but you know is that right um and so
these are that's why these problems are
so intractable and then the fourth is to
come back to
your point about my rights and your
rights
it doesn't really work um in this
context because um you know we had an
example of that with covid and mask
wearing
and you know my own view is that you
don't have a right to expose somebody
else to illness you have a right to make
choices about where you wear a mask if
you're the only person who's going to be
affected you know walking around a park
or something but my own view is we don't
have a right to expose someone else to
covid any more than we have a right to
run a red light or to drive drunk or
you know any other sort of behavior that
would put someone else can i zoom in on
that because this is where the stuff
starts to get so hard for me
so
um
people because i was gonna translate
those words into because when you said
we don't have the right to expose
somebody else to illness i don't think
people would agree with that you don't
have the right to expose them to an
illness that is believed to be serious
that i think you'd get a lot more people
on board okay good problem is that some
people are going to say that covet isn't
that serious
and so and now like if we really want to
get complicated covet is way more
serious for somebody that has underlying
conditions
so if you are
obese for instance your risk factors go
through the roof
so now it's like okay well for some
people it really may not be a big deal
for other people it is devastating super
dangerous so we have one of my teammates
here at impact theory
they they can't get vaccinated because
they're in the high allergy group so
they've been told not to take the
vaccine like they would love to they
can't so they've effectively not left
their house for two and a half years i
mean emotionally devastating emotionally
terrible yeah yeah so this is not a
person like trying to draw a line in the
sand and be uppity about it like they're
just they would love to but they can't
and
so
they're at ultra high risk so now they
wouldn't want to be exposed so but how
now do we come to an agreement where
you've got
definitions become so not only how you
define your principles is a question but
how you define whether this is a serious
illness or not because for however many
eons we've all exposed each other to
colds never been a big deal if you saw
somebody sneeze in public you might give
them a sideways glance you know during
cold season but you wouldn't be like now
people like run up and scream at you i
never saw that before so it's like we've
got moods shifting i think based on the
perceived seriousness of the illness
but not everybody's on board with that
so how do we
i think you raise a really great point
which is that we're not going to get
everybody on board with any of this
now one of the things about covid is
that we need to start with the science
wherever the science is and you know the
science has evolved and the messaging
that we've gotten from the cdc and from
the who and these you know and medical
leaders has shifted as the science has
shifted with covert we need to start
with the science um and then people will
have different sort of risk reward
calculations as you've said yourself
you've given some great examples uh and
institutions will have different risk
reward calculations so for example i
teach at stanford spring term and we all
wear masks in class and there are plenty
of students who think that's ridiculous
and there are plenty of students who
would wear a mask even if it wasn't now
it's strongly recommended
but even when it was required so so i'm
not sure we're going to get to everybody
agreeing on things i would hope we could
at least agree
that we need to acknowledge what the
science says and then our different risk
reward calculations might be different
the free speech is is
you know a whole other dimension of
sensitivity um and then we have in the
balance also
just the importance of a diversity of
ideas when we look at other parts of the
world where you know there's rising
authoritarianism what's that about it's
a lot about controlling the narrative
it's a lot about one person saying you
know your speech anywhere is censored or
this is what happened and not giving
people access to other views about what
happened whether it's history or whether
it's what happened this morning
and we certainly are seeing that in
russia we're seeing that uh with victor
orban we're seeing that in you know in
in
um
in hungary
uh i don't know anything about it and
something bad i take it is happening
he's basically an authoritarian figure
great yeah
that's gonna look bad as a transcript
but just for anybody reading somehow i
don't mean literally great that's
terrible yeah um no but just to say that
that you know rising authoritarianism is
a lot about controlling the narrative
and so
um all of the democratic ideals that you
know
most of us hold to be important and that
you know in other countries people
strive for
and they give us the rights that you're
talking about and the freedoms you're
talking about if free speech is
incredibly important and at the same
time
we are also at record levels of speech
that
is just
abhorrent
it's just a really really complicated
problem now i think the the the one
aspect of this that uh comes up a lot is
cancel culture
and i don't know if you have a view on
on cancel culture i do i have a a blunt
force trauma view on cancer culture it's
not nuanced nobody should take what i
say is policy but
the way that i look at that is it's
coming from
it started in a beautiful place
and it the the divide that i see
happening now is i think based in what i
call directives that are embedded in the
human mind from evolution i think
evolution realized realized this is
obviously not the blind watchmaker to
use richard dawkins term but the to
anthropomorphize it you've got evolution
realizing that you need a bifurcated
strategy in which the
the best result comes from the friction
between two different ways of viewing
the world and in a two-party system it
basically as far as i know and again i'm
not a scholar on this but i've looked at
it closely enough this feels roughly
accurate uh two-party systems are always
going to break down along the following
lines you're going to have one group is
the
you have to be compassionate and you no
man left behind right like we're going
to make sure that everybody gets taken
care of and then on the other side you
have personal responsibility and if you
look at this from an evolutionary lens
you understand why this would be useful
as a social creature you need to take
care of the other people and try because
their strength in numbers and so if
you're not tribe centric if you're not
thinking about the whole you're going to
get picked off you'll value isolation
you won't think about it you're dust
yeah
i was gonna go into the prehistoric
documentary by apple tv it's absolutely
incredible uh anyway but if you get
isolated you're in real trouble
but on the other hand you will get um
there's a guy named dan ariely who wrote
a book called predictably irrational he
goes into all the weird things that
humans do and one of them is that we
will lie and take advantage to the point
where it doesn't force us to change our
opinion of ourselves which i think is a
really keen insight it's a really key
insight so you've got
the freeloader problem so if you're over
here we've got to take care of everybody
there will be a subset of people that
are like word you'll take care of me so
i'm not going to do anything so that has
to be balanced out by people like hold
on hold on hold on like yes i get it but
you need to also
take responsibility for yourself work
hard contribute now either of those
devolve into tyranny in either direction
like if you let just people trying to be
compassionate go this way you have the
gulag archipelago for anybody listening
that hasn't read that read it it will
terrify the out of you and then
over here on the other side you devolve
into the nazis so it's like hey we're
going towards madness in either
direction
it is the friction between those two
things that makes magic so my wife and i
for instance we very much look at the
world differently we share a lot of
values which is how we're able to stay
together but we also are really
different which is why we have a high
functioning marriage and a high
functioning business so we need that
friction now what i have learned is that
when the sides value the friction and
they realize oh i actually wouldn't
thrive on my own i feel really strongly
about my side but i would not thrive on
my own
then all is well when one side though
goes no no i'm right and they are the
enemy and they are a problem and that's
all i hear right now so it feels like
we're just getting yanked in either
direction so cancel culture is born of
this idea of my side is right the other
side is not just wrong but there are
others it doesn't deserve to exist
exactly and now you get into a dark dark
place so where i come out on council
culture is that there really is language
and there really are actions that just
shouldn't be that really are just
abhorrent
but i think we should be canceling that
language and those actions and not
canceling people interesting so once you
cancel because you believe in redemption
well um let me put it in like in pure
ethics terms or at least like prac my
practical ethics terms when you cancel
someone you basically another way of
saying that is you've just give taken
away
all incentive for them to try to improve
all incentive why should anybody try to
improve if no matter what they do you've
decided they don't deserve to exist
these are facts right
so i believe in ethical resilience and
recovery i don't know that i'd call it
redemption because it's hard work to
your earlier point it's tell the truth
take your part of the responsibility
and then make a plan so that it doesn't
happen again
well if you've canceled somebody they're
not going to bother to do any of that
and the other thing is coming back to
your humility point which i
wholeheartedly share
you know we all make mistakes we all
have errors in judgment we're all we all
look at something we said and think of
oh my god how could i have said that
and in fact in my stanford classes i
tell everyone because the topics are so
sensitive i basically say at the
beginning of the term everyone's going
to say something they're going to regret
so if you need to correct and i have too
many hands in the air and i don't get to
you just like wave your hand wildly and
say sorry i need to do a correction and
i will make a point of calling on you
and let you do a correction and we're
all going to give each other benefit of
the doubt um
but cancel culture is a way of saying
i'm you don't deserve to exist as a
human being
uh that's so hardcore that's so hardcore
and i think that you know but i
certainly think there's a lot of
language that doesn't deserve to exist
and a lot of you know and a lot of
behavior that should never exist
um so
so i hope we can get away from canceling
people and get cancelling language and
behavior um
and hope you know but
but like you like you said
i'm i'm an ethics optimist so i'm
fundamentally um you know high energy
high optimism very pro-innovation
so uh yeah i'm i'm i'm optimistic
but it's a difficult time it's a
difficult time that's that is a very
gentle way to say where i was headed so
i am optimistic
for two reasons one by nature i'm
optimistic and two i think that um mood
follows action so
if i focus on all the ways that
everything is going wrong i'm just going
to get more and more and more
pessimistic if i focus on all the ways
we can get things to go right then i'm
at least going to keep trying
so i don't want to give up but
ray dalio really summed up my belief so
he wrote a book called principles for
dealing with a changing world order
nobody has spent more money if i
remember right he spent hundreds of
millions of dollars trying to figure out
sort of global movements he's used ai
he's built the largest hedge fund in the
world so this is a person whose job
depends on his ability to read sort of
how societies change over time so that
he knows where to invest and where not
to invest
and 18 months ago he writes a book and
he says i put the us's chance of going
into civil war at 30 percent
i interview him 18 months after he wrote
it and i said where do you think our
chance of civil war is now and he said i
put it at 40 percent
that's terrifying that is terrifying so
the person who spent more money than
anybody else looking at this uh has more
incentive to get this right than anybody
else is telling you that we're moving in
the wrong direction
and
that's how it feels to me that we're
moving in the wrong direction now i love
that he still got us below 50 percent so
that i'm going to cling to that as the
optimist
but i really feel like we're moving in
the wrong direction and so as a as an
entrepreneur i think a lot about the
idea of
how you unwind something so you have to
be able to test so i believe in what i
call the physics of progress the physics
of progress is just the
scientific method recontextualized for
business so it's hypothesis test your
hypothesis look honestly at the data
refine your hypothesis try again
so i'm always looking at that well
whatever i try it's not going to work
all the way and so i need the ability to
fail to some extent sometimes
catastrophically other times just a
little bit to learn to refine to try
again
and
as i'm looking at the problem through
that lens of like okay like
how do we begin to unwind because i feel
like culturally we're all making a
mistake we're we're doing things that
increase the division from the way
social media algorithms work to the way
that we're defining the overton window
to the way that we're othering people
that hold different views in us it's
been going on for a very very very very
long time long before we got into social
media but turbo charged by social media
turbocharged in the extreme
so
now we have
something where i don't see the way out
i'm not saying there isn't one i'm just
saying i with my limited brain and
viewpoint i don't see the path out
knowing what i know about human brains
other than
massive suffering
so normally what happens and
unfortunately this is exactly what
radelio is talking about is hey guys
i've just looked at the last 5 000 years
of recorded history
and i'm telling you that we move in a
six-phase cycle
and nobody
stays in what's phase three i think is
prosperity nobody stays in phase three
very long
and it's just human nature and i think
the exact way he said it is there's only
a certain number of personality types
and that's why history repeats itself
because it's just
humans react to each other based on
these whatever 19 personality types and
that's it and you're just going to keep
coming back around and so
again i say this with my optimistic hat
on but ah
with my limited brain i don't see how we
back out of this because the only way
that i see is for people to want
to reconnect to want to see the other
person is like they're a full-fledged
human being acting in good faith
and they just believe something
different than me and i need to relish
the friction between our world views
so i certainly agree with you
that we're not headed in a great
direction right now in a lot of ways and
some have to do with laws that are being
adopted across the u.s just to speak to
the us for a moment i mean ukraine is
certainly
tragic um i think i read in an op-ed in
the new york times this morning that
there have been 243 mass shootings in
the us since the beginning of 2022.
that's insane yeah i think i could get
now that number could be wrong i could
be remembering it wrong from my brother
guessing you're directly correct um but
it's pretty insane uh and that is a more
u.s specific problem
but there are a lot of ways in which
we're going in the wrong direction
and i certainly don't have all the
answers and i certainly don't have ray
dalio's perspective or budget or
analysis and i think and i find it
fascinating
but i have to say i i do believe that we
will see
the importance of connecting um in fact
i say in my first book that ethics is
the great connector just stopping and
thinking about our decisions even on a
daily basis even how we interact with
family members
and i think we're going to have to think
about lots of different contributors to
a solution
and not one um and we're going to have
to stop and can you give me some of
those like if we were just going to
march to your drum beat
which i'm sure is not a responsibility
you want but let's say that you have it
and then we're going to follow
definitely what would we think i should
be telling anybody what to do but yeah
so
in in that caveat what are your sort of
best practices on this real issue
where we're headed towards massive
division how do we get back together
so one thing is to take a deep breath
and really listen to what other people
are telling us i talk a lot about
effective listening as a critical pillar
of ethics
listening to what people are really
telling us
not what we want to hear not what we
expect to hear
not what we think they should be telling
us in all kinds of ways starting with
medical diagnostics all the way to
people that we think have entirely
different points of view what is it that
is driving that point of view what are
they really telling us
is it really about that one issue or is
it really about a context that we're not
fully understanding sort of it's back to
sort of where's the problem that we're
trying to solve so i think that's one
thing i think the second is
is this really
seemingly simple kind of pressing pause
and saying
what i'm about to do what is the worst
impact that could have
and if it were me
if it were my child would i still do it
and even if we still proceed sometimes
you know selfishly so put it that way
i i really think that it just this sense
of just
thinking about the consequences of what
we say and do on someone else um is
really uh is really important one place
we've seen i don't know i don't know if
you've had any of this experience but a
bit of an awakening in that respect is
around um
racism and a lot of the great writing
that has come to the fore about racism
and about how a lot of us
you know
think of course we're not racist of
course we you know uh don't hold views
like that of course we don't speak in
race in what we consider to be racist
ways but one of the things that many of
us and i put you know my hand up first
recognize we all have a lot of work to
do we all come with unconscious biases
nobody is free from unconscious biases
and so just that awareness i think has
been taking hold
uh more broadly in recent years um
thanks to a whole range of different
writers and just thanks to what's gone
on in society what is up my friend tom
bill you here and i have a big question
to ask you how would you rate your level
of personal discipline on a scale of one
to ten if your answer is anything less
than a ten i've got something cool for
you and let me tell you right now
discipline by its very nature means
compelling yourself to do difficult
things that are stressful boring which
is what kills most people or possibly
scary or even painful now here is the
thing achieving huge goals and
stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact i will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
all right i've just released a class
from impact theory university called how
to build ironclad discipline that
teaches you the process of building
yourself up in this area so that you can
push yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work i will see you inside
this workshop from impact theory
university until then my friends be
legendary peace out
so this goes back to
um
what i was saying about efficacy
so on race again i do not have wisdom
around race but i have
concerns that if we look at the data
that we're getting more polarized around
race now than we were before like
man i didn't used to think about race
at all
and
meaning i like i completely subscribed
to the idea and now this is like
considered passe
i'm a total like martin luther king jr
guy
or a nelson mandela guy and i just think
oh my god like nelson mandela may be the
most inspiring person i've ever
encountered in history like when i hear
his story i am i am knocked to my knees
with recognition that i'm not strong
enough to do what he did
and that's not me being humble that is
me just knowing myself well enough like
27 years in prison i don't i certainly i
i couldn't come close yeah so just did
something that i i am not
uh emotionally equipped to pull off
and
but his whole thing was he comes out of
prison
and says no i want the the very people
that were part of my incarceration i
want them to be on my security detail
and knew that this is about unity about
bringing people together right martin
luther king i have a dream that people
will be judged by the content of their
character and not the color of their
skin
and that's being considered passe right
like that's a naive way to look at the
problem and so i'm like oh man like i
don't know like this doesn't feel like
we're headed in a unification direction
it feels like we're getting now pulled
even more violently apart
i think on that one i certainly i
certainly wouldn't disagree that we're
being pulled apart but i do think that
there's a recognition for example that
we all bring unconscious bias to the
table
as a factor of evolution or you think
there's something else it's just a fact
of the way we see the world
that we can all benefit from having many
different voices around the table and
hiring uh many different voices around
the table and determining you know back
to sort of twitter like what is
tolerable speech and what isn't
um and that we all sort of see the world
through a lens you know i'm a white
woman i see you know by definition i
don't see the world the way somebody who
grew up in a different context or
um you know who brings different um
characteristics to the problem you know
i don't see the i i don't necessarily so
i want to differentiate between and
again this i am thank you all for
letting me explore ideas that i don't
think that i have wisdom in and
literally just thinking through this in
real time but that
i think we need to draw a distinction
between racism and frame of reference
so
you're definitely as a white person
growing up in a white majority country
you're gonna have a very different frame
of reference than somebody growing up in
that same country who is not that race
but to me like as somebody who's
traveled to japan quite a bit
it's a real different story to be a
white person in japan where they are
maybe not even with
cruel intention but japan and again this
is like my favorite country i love being
there it's so amazing but i wouldn't
move there
because they just don't necessarily love
foreigners and so while i love
the culture that they've created is
absolutely amazing
as somebody obsessed with robots and
anime uh i'm
i am aware enough to know that getting
business done for me as an outsider
whether that's because i'm white or that
i just didn't grow up in japan
they're not loving it
so
the my frame of reference in japan would
be very very different because there i
would be not in the majority right so
um frame of reference gonna be wildly
different
but i would say that to we have to keep
i think it is wise because my goal again
is to lower human suffering to raise
people's ability to or likelihood maybe
i should say of reaching fulfillment
uh is that
racism to me is thinking less of a group
because of immutable characteristics
and
that to me is very different than being
able to in fact i think about this a
fair amount because we create
fictional characters and so as we create
those fictional characters like my wife
will make a good point hey you guys need
to make sure that you get women uh
looking at that project you're creating
a woman like and she comes at it from
the lens of you want to make sure that
it's appealing to other women not that
she's worried necessarily about
offending people but just like hey if
you want women to actually be jazzed
about that character
have women look at it don't just have a
bunch of guys
same thing from a
ethnicity standpoint it's like you want
to represent it well so you want to make
sure that you have somebody who
understands
that
living that lifestyle what that means
how they come across so you want that
viewpoint that opinion
but missing something there to me isn't
racism it's just frame of reference
all i'm saying is that i think that
we've come to a point in recent years
where we're better at saying
um
we all have unconscious bias
and it's not just about race we all have
unconscious bias of all kinds
and we all benefit from diverse views so
the abraham lincoln
team of rivals you know uh and and we
need to sort of do more of that
certainly people in washington need to
do more of that leaders of all kinds
need to do more of that but i think do
we get to that from
the sort of visual diversity or do we
get to that by what lincoln was actually
doing which is people who think
differently than me people who think i'm
wrong essentially on a lot of things
giving me a different opinion because
what i worry about is we have a team
that's visually different men women
every ethnicity but we all come from
going back to that idea that you you get
this inherent division from evolution
which is you're either on the
compassionate or the personal
responsibility side if you get all
people on personal responsibility i
would say you don't have diversity of
thought even if you have diversity
diversity of thought is essential lots
of different kinds of diversity um are
essential different ages can be
essential different you know gender
identities can be essential but
diversity of thought is is absolutely
critical
and and so i wouldn't say it's either or
i'd say it's sort of all of the above
but absolutely i do not believe that
there are diverse boards diverse
companies or ngos or other organizations
um that don't have diversity of thought
and somehow that just seems to get left
out of the conversation including the
conversations about quotas and women on
boards and all this kind of thing but i
think diversity of thought absolutely
and even among friends i have a question
in the book about you know would you be
friends with somebody who has really
different points of view
um from you on on any serious issue and
where i really started to see this um
and this comes from spending a lot of
time every year living in london
is brexit
i had never seen
some a political issue tear families
apart like brexit tore families apart
there were families who were not
speaking to each other close families
you know husbands and wives and children
and parents and who are not speaking to
each other over their point of view
about brexit
and then we saw the 2016 election and we
saw the same thing here i had never seen
people so torn apart friendships in
particular fraying over political issues
and that's where i started to really
think about this issue of you know
diversity of thought
and also as you know not othering people
and also
are we at a point though where some of
the thought is so abhorrent that we
really are going to draw a line that we
really are going to say you know what i
don't need to be friends with you or i
just can't have that kind of thing
around me because and where for me it
started to happen was where we get to
the point where people just
don't can't tell the truth about really
fundamental things where they are
willing to believe that
something that is proven scientifically
or statistically to be true they are
denying facts because at that point we
start to say well if you're going to
deny facts about whether an election
happened or you're going to not deny
facts about
covid uh um scientific facts
um then
what where what's where's truth in our
relationship what are you gonna not tell
me the truth about in our personal
relationship so i think it became very
complicated for people and i think it
still is because of the polarization you
mentioned
do you worry at all
that
the person isn't lying
that instead it's something far more
terrifying to me
which is that they can look at the data
and because they so
believe in their worldview that they
just see what matches their worldview
they're not even trying to cram it into
their worldview i completely
agree that this is a
huge huge problem a huge danger beyond
that there's well there are a couple
parts to it one is just the spread of
misinformation so people in information
packaged in ways that looks like
scientific truth or that looks like it's
coming from authority and so people
well-meaning people who are not really
trying to make the world fit into their
world view are still being
misled and so good faith people are
being misled and in part by just the
volume you know the normalization of
some of the
uh misstatements out there
and the spreading of it all so that's
one danger but the other thing is you're
right i mean we
we
i very much worry
that people will take facts and
and hear my air quotes interpret them
uh in a way that sort of suits the way
they want the world to be
um and
that it's incredibly serious and you
know in general there's a there's a
phenomenon that i wouldn't put in that
really serious camp but that is
happening among um the younger
generation that has grown up with
you know cell phones and sort of ability
to program i want to watch this program
now i want to listen to this song and oh
on top of everything else it's free
this idea that somehow we can program
the world to be
the way we want it to be
it doesn't work that way that's really
interesting you know and i think that's
one of the reasons why we have these
epidemics of mental health issues and
i'm no mental health expert but i do
follow the statistics and i'm very much
sort of in the arena so to speak in
academic institutions and also looking
at teenagers um high schools etc and we
are really in a moment where not only do
we think
incorrectly in my view that we can make
the world the way we want it to be but
when it isn't
it's creating all sorts of very real
human suffering back to your point
uh and i think that is really dangerous
um and i remember i had that i need more
on this so this is really intriguing so
we can't make the world in our own image
and the inability to do that is what
causes the suffering or the delusion
that you can and so they're trying and
they're not getting anywhere
like where what's the real critical i
think kind of both to be honest but i
had the privilege of interviewing sir
salman rushdie um on my ethics incubator
platform and we talked a lot about truth
and it was sort of ironic that a fiction
writer um you know had so many insights
on truth and in fact israel you have to
go into hiding he did at one point
yeah there was a it was with one of his
um earlier books um give people context
because i don't know a lot about his
story but the little bit i know is like
whoa so he is an extraordinary
award-winning um author
and he's won
twice the man booker prize which is a
very famous literary prize he writes
fiction mostly although recently he's
done a book on truth
and there was uh
basically threats against his life uh at
one point uh early in his career for one
of his works um
basically around a presentation or what
was interpreted as a presentation um
around
aspects of of islam
that were considered extremely
disrespectful and he was in
you know in in potential physical danger
he's an extraordinary thinker and
extraordinary writer and he described in
something that's going to sound fairly
straightforward
he was at a book event for one of his
books
and he said that one of the audience
members was arguing with him about
something a matter of clear fact
and he finally looked at the person and
said you know it's not because
you know you want the world to be flat
that it's flat the world doesn't need
you to believe
it's round for it to be round
and i think you know that basically sums
it up and i think it's it's really we
are though at this point where
um many people particularly in younger
generation that have grown up with so
much control so much access and again
free access
um
it's created this idea that everything
should be the way they want we're seeing
a little bit of it in terms of return to
work
that every everybody should be able to
do exactly what they want
and it is creating enormous enormous
amounts of stress
yeah this is uh man this is
this is fascinating
getting into how people navigate the
world
how they build up their frame of
reference so this like if i were going
to have uh something on my tombstone
that summed up what i was trying to do
it would be you're having a biological
experience
and the reason i want people to
understand that is once you understand
uh how the wiring of your brain
plays certain tricks on you
creates these sort of cognitive
illusions in the way that we have visual
optical illusions you get cognitive
illusions
and that
once you understand how the brain works
then you can better sort of insert
yourself
in there
for instance one of the things that i
remind myself
of all the time is that emotions make
dots feel like they connect that don't
actually connect
so the emotion that makes you feel like
that other person has no right to even
exist as a human being
that's the emotion that's connecting
dots that really aren't there
and
if you can see past that stuff you can
start to tease out things like frame of
reference
and as i tried to really define what is
a frame of reference and you know how
does it hold people back
um
i
began to realize that people start
believing things that they mistake for
objective truth but is actually just a
belief
uh that they i'll give you an example
failing makes me a failure forever
and they don't really think about it
they just think that oh if you fail then
you're a failure
so to them it's a recognition of
objective truth but it has just
catastrophic effects
in their life so if somebody has the
frame of reference that the world ought
to be this way
uh and it's not and that's a problem and
burn it down until we get that world and
there's no sort of inserting themselves
into well there's cause and effect
there's no utopia only trade-offs which
are also beliefs by the way
then you get real problems how do you
begin to like walk people out of this so
one of the things that um cancel culture
and your failure example
have in common is that they're dead ends
and another one that is going to sound
very different but that is equally a
dead end is perfectionism
and this epidemic of perfectionism we
have and that's kind of the flip side of
your failure example
and i tell people that perfectionism is
one of the greatest risks to ethics that
we have
and the reason is that
you know it's not an achievable goal in
my view it's also not a laudable goal
but when people are given
perfectionist standards or when people
give themselves perfectionist standards
and i don't care if it's unrealistic
sales targets or gpas
you know grades
or
physical appearance
there's only two possible paths
one is you try and try and try and you
still never make it and that's where
mental health consequences come in and
that's where you know kind of distorted
interaction with the world comes in or
you cheat
and you still don't really achieve it
but that's where that's why it's an
ethical problem because at some point
when people are given impossible targets
or give themselves impossible targets
they cheat and there's all manner of
cheating some of it seems pretty minor
it might be on a dating app you're going
to kind of fudge your age or your
question like i write about in the book
there was this guy who in the
netherlands who wanted to i think it was
in the netherlands who wanted to
have a court
declare that he was
considerably younger because he felt
air quotes again considerably younger
and his doctor said that his biological
age was considerably younger but
factually he was born on a particular
day and even though i'm not much of a
mathematician i can calculate the number
between that date and today
and it was you know
much greater than the number he wanted
the court to declare and the court said
we're having none of this right
fact
chronological fact has a real value in
society but that's another aspect of you
know i want to kind of fudge i don't
really like my reality so i'll put out
there on the app and some of that's
harmless and just good fun
but then some of it is you know
all kinds of cheating that goes on in in
the corporate world or all kinds of
cutting corners of safety
because targets for building a bridge or
building a school can't be met financial
targets deadlines so safety
shortcuts i mean it comes up in all
kinds of ways
so perfectionism is another one of those
dead ends and dead ends are not good
from an ethics standpoint no doubt
how do we begin to
give people what they need to sort of
navigate that kind of complexity so
you've got the pillars that you talk
about you've got the four words that we
started all of this with
um
do you have
like guiding questions ask yourself so
you do have one for sure which is
imagine the person who's most adversely
affected now imagine that's you would
you still do it
um
but are there like certain rules that
you would
put in place like because what i what i
would love to see and i don't know if
this is possible but it probably could
get us 80 or 90 percent of the way there
where meaning sort of all of the things
that we're going to encounter on a very
frequent basis would be handled by the
following set of criteria
um you know we talked in the beginning
about our north stars but obviously
we're going to have to break that out
into either questions we can ask or
milestones that we can check
um so i mean there's the two that i
would say or the one that you mentioned
and also what i said about consequences
what are the consequences over time
going to be and are they really
important and really irreparable
if not
irreparable go ahead and give it a shot
if not irreparable then you know you
might weigh things differently um but
there are going to be especially in
today's world there aren't going to be
sort of a set of rules like you know
you know if it's dark green go to door
number one and then if you're in door
number one and you see the sunshine go
to you know go to door number two i mean
there aren't going to be rules like that
in these questions it's going to be
about our deciding you ever find
yourself tempted to create that rule
book like have you done that thought
experiment that's how you know it
doesn't work or
yeah i know it doesn't work because
we're in a situation where too many of
our principles conflict
okay where we have free speech you know
against protection against
uh violence and racism and things like
that where we have
you know individual uh freedom to decide
whether or not to wear a mask and to
decide that you know for somebody as you
said different degrees of seriousness
for covid versus protecting i mean we're
just constantly finding ourselves in
these situations of conflicting
principles
uh and so it's not there aren't going to
be sort of perfect answers
and i think we just need to get to the
point where being thoughtful
stopping and thinking what does that
look like to the person most adversely
affected is the single most important
role i can suggest and the and the um
important and irreparable that's where
you're going to get to the vaccines and
the children that's where you're going
to get to the fact where you're going to
say you know what it seems like
bribery's you know an obvious no-no
but you know if it's going to cost
children their lives really are we
really not going to at least consider
i'm not saying that there's a right
answer for everybody but i mean are we
at least not going to consider
that we might want to look at this
problem differently
yeah one of the questions that i wanted
to ask you that feels tied to what
you're saying there is would you ever
make an unethical by your own
definition decision if it would
if making the ethical choice would kill
one of your children
i
love this question because it is so when
you talk about emotion
i cannot imagine and i want to say as
i'm answering this honoring
the parents
from this tragic shooting
jesus
i cannot imagine
what it is to lose a child
i mean my heart goes out to anybody
who has lost a child under any
circumstances
so i make no pretense of saying that i
would be sure about how i would behave
if that's what we're at stake
or anybody else's child i mean any human
life at risk but i think when it comes
you know to our own children i think
that i just can't imagine anything worse
is that a yes
doctor
yeah it's a yes yeah for me i mean for
sure all right yeah and i'm not saying
it makes me a good person i'm just
saying i would do it yeah and oh and by
the way um i'm not um interested so much
in sort of categorizing you know people
or things as ethical or unethical or
good or not good i think we're just
trying to make the best decisions we can
um the most humane decisions we can and
as you say eliminate the most suffering
but yeah i mean anytime human life is at
stake
i'm sorry i don't stand on ceremony
and if i had to answer the question that
i raised about the vaccines and the
children and the bribery i don't have a
problem
with the bribery but i know that there
will be consequences that i will have to
mitigate so i will have to make sure
that
it doesn't become a habit that there
isn't the contagion that i've spoken
about that it isn't that the port
authorities say oh they paid a hundred
dollars today so next time we'll just
raise the price you know there are lots
of things i would do to try to mitigate
the risks of
of that of the lack of ethics of that
decision of the
of the in fact illegal decision but
there's no question that when human life
is at stake that for me there's nothing
more important and certainly nothing
more irreparable
yeah and i don't know that there is
something way worse when it's kids
like that that exacerbates things a lot
so you bring up a really interesting
idea and this is what i was trying to
get to with efficacy so
every decision has consequences do you
know thomas soul
no i do not oh man i find him so
intriguing so brilliant economist oh i
have to go read yes he he's incredible
and
he has that quote that i said earlier
which i suppose i should have said this
is straight out of thomas soul's mouth
there's no utopia only trade-offs and
so getting people to understand in that
scenario for instance that it's not like
paying that bribe and saving those kids
is the utopia
it's
better maybe than the alternative
because i think most of us would say
that it's far better to save those lives
you know it's a bird in the hand like
because yes there might actually be
downstream consequences that i'm not
thinking of that i can't predict oh god
like i've tried to think through could
this have like these i mean you talked
earlier about consequences make sure
you're thinking out as far as you can
and not three weeks you know like as far
out as you can possibly imagine
but you know you're doing your best but
recognizing it as a trade-off
recognizing that we're not going to be
able to achieve the utopia that's one
thing that always scares me like reading
the gulag archipelago for those that
don't know is written by a guy named
soldie nitsan who was taken into the
russian gulag system basically
and his punchline is that it starts with
a few little lies to get along it starts
with not wanting to make waves because
they're coming after your neighbor and
not you and it's like oh do you really
want to raise you know your head
it's you know
um
the government saying hey this is all
working really well but you know people
are actually starving to death in the
ukraine and you're just like nod and
smile yeah yeah it's fine
and he said and then that ends with they
do show up on your door one day and you
do end up spending i forget how long he
spent in the gulag it was a long time
and the gulags are you know just brutal
and people dying left right and center
you're being tortured i mean it's crazy
and
it's more or less him screaming
for
it's a long book
hundreds of pages
and
recognizing that
you get to that because people really
believe in something like they really
want to do something good
and
when they lose sight of the fact that
there is no utopia there are only
trade-offs they ignore the trade-offs
because they think that it leads to a
utopia
and it's one of those like if i could
just get there's two things i always
want people to do one please start
distrusting yourself a little more
absolutely like that's huge that's a
variation on the theme of humility yes
and a variation on the theme of team of
rivals and i mean it just it cuts to
everything we've been talking about yep
and then to your point about a team of
rivals the whole point of a team of
rivals is that you recognize you won't
be able to think through the problem
well enough because of your own blind
spots your own frame of reference and so
you need somebody from the outside that
sees things totally differently than you
that will give you that opinion but you
have to be emotionally resilient because
it always hurts when somebody points out
that you were being foolish that's never
fun but really powerful if you're
willing to do it
and that's the second thing which is so
if one is distrusting yourself the
second one is looking at is this
actually working
and so looking at this idea of
trade-offs like i thought it would give
me this result it did and it gave me a
different result i know i'm never going
to get perfect anyway is this the
trade-off that i'm really willing to
make
if we
could get i think and again you know i
distrust myself so i don't know this is
right but this feels like a thing that
people should really be looking at
so i think the distrust ourselves is in
a positive way
which is to say
not in a way that is that undermines
self-confidence not in a way that
undermines
um willingness to try and take risks um
but just the sense that like none of us
can know everything there's so much
you've talked about today um that i know
nothing about neuroscience i mean i have
i try to read but you know i'm in no way
shape or form a neuroscientist who can
really understand the biology of the
brain and the implications for the
chemistry of the brain and the
implications of that for for all of this
um
but i think trade-offs you know utopia
is another form of perfectionism so it's
not something i've ever strived for and
it's not something that i think is
healthy for anybody to be trying to aim
for
but trade-offs that's the world we're in
we're making choices all the time and
one of the things i'm trying to show
with the book is that it doesn't need to
be exhausting it can be fun i mean a lot
of the questions in the book are
conversations they're just ways to
connect and they're ways to sort of do
the team of rivals without having a big
structure it's just you know chat about
a few questions while you're waiting in
line for coffee or with children or with
you know work colleagues it's really an
it's sort of an informal way to connect
and an informal way to sort of say oh
yeah i didn't think about it that way um
and the emotional resilience i mean the
way you put it i'm really sensitive to
you know you have to be emotionally
resilient
i would respectfully say easier said
than done yeah right it's really hard
it's when these things hit our emotions
it's really hard and as you pointed out
earlier such an important point you made
that a lot of times what we're willing
to accept as truth
is tainted by our emotions or driven by
our emotions
something may be presented to us as
factually true but we just don't want it
in our you know our world view we don't
that's not the way we want the world to
be
and somehow we convince ourselves that
it's not true uh or that even if it is
true we can still do what we want to do
so i think all of this is incredibly
important yup it doesn't matter what you
look at it matters what you see
i remember i had this argument one time
with my business partner
and
it was there was this one employee that
he really didn't like
and another employee that he really
liked and we had been going back and
forth because i was like hey that guy
that you like i'm not sure that he's has
the aptitude that you think he has
and so i ended up being in a situation
with both of them and
employee a who my partner really liked
um and that i had concerns about
made a pretty catastrophic error
and employee b my partner did not like
uh saved the day
and when i came back and told him the
story i said man employee b really saved
that moment and he was like i knew it i
knew employee b was a problem and i was
like no employee b saved it and he was
like i know man i knew that he was going
to end up making a mistake oh wow and i
was like whoa i'm like hey repeat it
back to me employee b saved the day and
he was like oh my god he was like whoa
he was like i was so sure he was gonna
be the problem i literally couldn't hear
what you were saying and so it was neat
because he could he finally on the third
one was like
whoa and so he himself saw in real time
like how easy it is when you are just
convinced that something is going to be
one way even though you're looking at
the very thing you're seeing it with
your own eyes you see something
completely differently and i've had that
illusion happen
before for me
where i'm expecting something to happen
and for a second my brain actually sees
it and then you're like wait no oh my
god that's not at all what is
literally before me that's exactly why i
say we really need all of us we my hand
up first uh we need to be
really focused on are we listening to
what people are really telling us and
not to use your word expect not what we
expect to hear
or what you know we think somebody
should be feeling
and this comes up all over the place
i've interviewed young doctors um sort
of residents at a hospital
and you know they'll say but they'll
have sort of a series of um symptoms in
their mind and so they're doing this
thing where they think they've already
made up their mind that it's x disease
and the person before them is saying but
i also have this and i also have that
and no actually i don't really have that
and they're not they're not listening
and they're also not to your earlier
point looking at the potential frame of
reference influence of the individual so
for example
a
um a patient from another country who's
in a u.s hospital who might bring
cultural uh
sort of frame of reference but also ways
of expressing themselves about illness
um ways of you know what they will or
will not say with family members around
some of you know certain cultures like
family members around in medical
situations
and in these doctors were just you know
time and again it's like i heard a b c
and d and therefore the diagnosis is x
and it's um you know and sometimes it
might be x but it might also be y and z
and sometimes it's not x at all but it's
exactly what you're saying it's we're so
convinced of what we you know what we
should be hearing
yeah it's bananas
i want to get into some of the fun fun
no putting quotes because the first one
from your book uh because the first one
is is terrifying but um i find the
answer very interesting so if your
mom let's say had dementia like
very developed dementia and her sister
was dead but she was
curious when is my sister coming to
visit
would you because truth and transparency
are two things you talk about in the
book a lot
would you
tell her the truth knowing you're gonna
have to say it every single time she
asks cause she'll forget again
so i have to say two things before i dig
into the answer one is that my heart
goes out to anybody who is dealing with
any form of dementia in any way yes it
is
it's a tragic illness and uh thankfully
there's a lot of research in the works
but it's not as advanced as we would all
hope that it is
um and the second is that i am not a
medical expert although i did speak with
a number of medical experts when i was
thinking about this question and i also
and i did speak with a number of people
who are actually dealing with it
and
what a lot of them said
was
truth over and over again it's relived
over and over again the tragic part of
it the harm the hurt
and
for a lot of people there's nothing that
they can do with that truth
because the person is gone
it's not like it's going to change a
decision that they could make for
themselves um while they're in various
degrees of ability to make decisions for
themselves and so that i thought was a
really important point for everyone to
think about and again i don't tell
people what the right answer is i'm just
trying to open a window to to to give
you know give some thoughts and to share
some thoughts and and from my research
but um i thought that was a really
important point you know suffering
and also
to what end would you be insisting on a
truth and then back to the being humane
is there something else you can do
if telling the truth isn't really going
to help well maybe that something else
is surrounding the person with other
people who are going to provide them
love and companionship
so that that loss
is i don't want to say mitigated
but that there's there are other sources
of love and companionship
to try to help compensate
yeah as somebody so my wife's
grandmother passed away i mean i think
technically cancer is what took her life
but she had like full blown dementia at
the end
um
and yeah just for sanity's sake it was
people stopped telling her you know when
she would ask about somebody that had
passed away they just
they're not here right now they'll come
back another time and to the point about
have a north star and let that guide you
like in terms of limiting human
suffering hers and everybody everybody
else's exactly it was just like oh my
god it's just so much easier because you
you test that you know she's at the
store or she's coming tomorrow whatever
and it's like oh okay word and she was
fine right
and doesn't remember asking about it the
next day anyway so there's no sense of
like oh you said yesterday she was
coming today what the hell like what's
good nope it's just like oh tomorrow
cool tomorrow cool
and uh yeah that that to me is
where
[Music]
it really is you you're basically
cobbling together a framework of
strategies that will work in
to the letter sort of in one case but
then you have to be more deft in another
case which is why
having that
north star of what you're trying to do
reduce suffering
for me making sure the individual has
sort of control of their destiny as long
as it's not infringing on other people
um becomes an important framework that
allows you to do your best right you're
never going to have a perfect answer
no that's right and i think the way you
describe it is really helpful and is
exactly what i'm trying to achieve with
the book which is
we can connect with each other over
these questions
and when you said it was fine you didn't
mean it was fine because you know
we can just go do unethical things and
it's fine because we were given a pass
in difficult circumstances you meant i
think if i may you meant that it was
fine because there had been a lot of
thoughtfulness around it and actually a
lot of connection probably among family
members or with maybe with doctors and
and just stopping and pausing and
thinking about the question and doing
the best everyone could under the
circumstances yeah no doubt
um
what are some of the
the more fun questions that you had
pursuing in the book
so there were questions or things that
are that don't have serious consequences
um you know in the long term like should
you use spotify for free but i'll tell
you the one that seems to really
resonate so i gave the book in my recent
stanford class i gave the book to all 65
students and i said all right you're
going to each each table groups of six
you can spend the next 25 minutes you're
going to pick three questions that
you're particularly interested in
each table of about i want to say there
are only me ten tables um
each table chose entirely different
questions with one exception the one
question where there was overlap was
would you read your child's journal
interesting and the london times also um
very kindly did an interview about the
book and the excellent journalist
um kept asking me about that one
question both sort of you know
on the record
[Laughter]
and then we sort of talked about you
know what does that mean for sort of
checking your your children's social
media but i thought that was so
interesting that of all the questions
that was the one that uh around i think
four or four of the tables out of six
had and all of the other ones were
entirely different that is really
interesting now i have a hotpot i i have
a hypothesis oh i'd love to watch it i'd
love to hear it well my hypothesis is
that it is the most consequential thing
so everybody's looking for a way to be
better make better decisions whatever
and because i've read the book i know
the punch line which is that
they were going through something with
their kid like they had a real like they
had other kids that had diaries they
didn't want to read those it was like
this one kid i have so much friction
with them
would there be an insight in the journal
that would help me and um knowing that i
am never going to discuss this with
anybody else so i get it like if people
are looking at it from that lens like
this is really consequential information
it would give me an insight
and then of course there's the like
humans you're having a biological
experience we're all wired for gossip
and so to get that like nugget of
information that you're not supposed to
have would be incredibly tantalizing so
mix the desire to have tantalizing
information with its insane usefulness
and i can get why people want a pass
on that one no absolutely and especially
because they give themselves a pass for
the very point you raise which is well
i'm not using it for gossip i would
never dream of sharing it with anybody
except perhaps a medical professional
who was bound by confidentiality
so these questions are not that simple
but they are
part of the the goal of the book was
also to show that not everything is a
big techie question
you know we have very real day-to-day
questions um through which we can
connect with each other uh and they
don't all have to be sort of big you
know the ethics of civilian space travel
there is one though that i think is
super germane and falls into that and uh
i would be remiss not to ask somebody of
your expertise this question so ai is
gonna have to make decisions
in a car
as to i'm going to hit something
and so somebody has to program me how to
choose between a baby
an old person
and a cliff that will kill the driver
so
how
would you advise them to think through
problems like the trolley problem oh
okay so let me first start by saying i'm
not a technologist but i do spend a lot
of time thinking about these questions
the most important thing in what you
just said in my view is that somebody is
going to program it
and i think there's a question about at
what point is somebody programming so
that we know that if you get into
this brand of car
oh okay it becomes
this is marketing
going to happen and also do you actually
do you actually have an obligation of
transparency you know we're the x motor
company and we have this driverless car
just so you know if you're ever in this
situation we're going to prioritize the
pedestrian and not you or we're going to
okay
so i'm wondering about those questions
coming down yeah um
and i'm not enough of a technologist to
know how much
with machine learning etc that we're
gonna have the cars making their own
decisions so to speak but i think
it raises a really important more
general question which is
at what point are we going to put these
things out there
and it's not as obvious to me
as a pro-innovation
ethicist it's not as obvious to me that
we should wait as long as sometimes we
think we should
so i've spoken to people about why are
we so squeamish about the ethics of
driverless cars and we're not as
squeamish about other things um and
sometimes people will say well that's
because we've created these we didn't
necessarily need them so we've created
them and you know there's no great rush
and my answer to that is to your really
important uh frame frame of reference
point
we in the u.s and especially in the
state of california we have rule of law
by and large we have road rules and safe
roads and people by and large abide by
the rules and when they don't they're
enforced we have good hospitals we have
good car repair we have car insurance
for most people
but if you look at the risks of
road deaths in some developing countries
and i will get this statistic wrong but
just for order of magnitude i believe
the world bank published statistics a
while ago that was something along the
lines of 90 of the deaths from road
accidents happen in developing countries
where there are 50 percent of the
world's cars now that is the numbers are
going to be wrong and certainly they're
going to be correct but it's just
direction right just the idea that we
need to be thinking when we think about
innovation
and how squeamish we are about different
risks or quite the the question you're
raising we need to be thinking about it
uh i think from the perspective of other
people's needs as well
you talk about reducing suffering so if
you're sitting in one of those countries
where there isn't necessarily the same
road safety roads road quality is good
there isn't medical care rule of law is
not necessarily enforced boy driverless
cars are starting to look very different
no doubt um yeah going back to that
question that you said about um
you're going to have uh sorry it wasn't
a question it was something you said in
the book about um
autonomous weapons
and it got me thinking about autonomous
cars and autonomous weapons and that uh
obviously
when
a car hits and kills somebody and let's
say in fact i think in the book you give
the example of somebody's daughter was
hit and killed and i was just like oh
god like that is so horrendous i can't
imagine
you get to rage at the driver
and you get to be angry you know who to
be angry with there's a person to point
your blame at when it's an autonomous
car you're robbed of that
and also there's something unnatural
about like a
machine just killed my you know loved
one that i think causes people great
distress because i was thinking about
let's say
that we did
autonomous weapons
and one goes off inappropriately and
kills somebody innocent but let's say
that the overall number of innocent
deaths have gone way down
people i think are still going to have a
hard time with that because again
there's no human to push back on
something feels super unnatural it feels
like
um
when a human is in control you feel like
you can appeal to their humanity
and when a machine goes awry it's like
the state coming after you it's so
inhuman and faceless and just like
there's something really scary about
that well there's a reason why a lot of
ai codes of ethics and there are there
is a proliferation of ai codes of ethics
out there from from different
organizations to
corporate codes of ethics around ai
there's a whole bunch of them but one
thing many of them have in common is
sort of a human checkpoint
that there need to be sort of you know
there needs to be a human being in the
mix but another place that this comes
out and i don't know if you think this
is kind of a similar example but bot
therapists what happens if a bot
therapist gives really bad advice or
fails to recognize someone who's at
serious mental health risk or harming
themselves
is it
this machine or this algorithm or this
whatever this thing is whether or not
it's in a humanoid format um this app
uh or is it the company uh is it the
programmer is it the regulators who
haven't adequately looked at this and
said look you can only use it for these
things and you have to say these things
about it like smoking kills on a
cigarette package
but it's the same kind of thing it's
like this machine uh it's it it's very
very
difficult because we don't feel like we
there's somehow there's comfort
as polarized as we are there's comfort
in human beings being involved
yeah i agree i want to see more
technology i want to see it get that
good and i think it will
um
[Music]
i think
there is inevitably going to be early
mistakes that cause a lot of backlash
and that makes me very sad because it
just it is you know what it is but to
your point okay imagine the worst case
scenario or the person most negatively
affected imagine that was me or my loved
one
it does like
slow your roll a bit there's no question
but i yeah i'm very eager to see that
happen because in the case of a
therapist for instance a therapist like
a human i should say can take in
something like 13 points of data but
your subconscious can take in like 150.
so
not to mention not everybody has access
to a therapist or financial resources to
pay for a therapist whereas some of
these apps are incredibly accessible yup
so you get these robots that can take in
just ungodly 700 points a thousand
points of data whatever it is so they're
just able to read way more so the like
for instance robots can already detect
skin cancer better than a human doctor i
think it will become very soon that
they'll be able to read pet scans better
so
that especially because it's just data
and repetition machines are going to get
insane at that i so favor
um diagnostic tools i mean again there's
a doctor that is going to interpret them
there's a doctor that is going to make a
decision about what to do with them so
we very much have a human in the mix if
it's done right it's not you know a
machine is going to diagnose you a
machine is going to tell you what to do
but when when i see the data
on diagnostics
on you know finding skin cancer
but it's why would you
why would you shut that door
i wouldn't yeah i'm i am super eager for
that stuff it's really really impressive
this has been a lot of fun
where can people follow you
so i have my ethics incubator site um
and i'm also on twitter but only for
ethics matters
you don't get sucked into drama no i
don't get sucked into drama very wise um
and um i'm also uh reach out to me on
linkedin i love it amazing thank you so
much oh my god thank you for being here
this is wonderful
everybody you need a frame of reference
in your life if you want to do well read
her books they are extraordinarily
interesting they will get you thinking
all the right things she doesn't preach
it will pique your curiosity give you a
framework with which to
find your own framework if you will it's
incredible speaking of things that are
incredible if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace
we are now hackable animals that we have
the technology to decipher what you
think what you want to predict human
choices to manipulate human desires